Top Chest Exercises for a Strong and Functional Upper Body


Bottom line
Performing chest exercises, such as push-ups and bench presses, can help increase the strength and definition of your chest muscles.
The chest muscles could be considered a defining part of strength anatomy. They are involved in actions such as squeezing a set of loppers to cut a tree branch and pushing a door open. They are also the primary muscles referenced when debating upper body strength (“How much can you bench, bro?”).
For body builders and those interested in general muscular aesthetics, the chest muscles are the defining part of muscle mass. Powerlifters rely on them for the bench press to score the greatest lift.
But these muscles are also incredibly important from a functional standpoint because they support the movement of the arms.
A number of studies examining perceived attractiveness found that a low waist-to-chest ratio was rated as the most attractive physical feature on males (1Trusted Source). This is when a person has a narrower waist and broader chest.
But gender-specific beauty standards aside, everyone can benefit from strengthening the chest muscles — whether your goal is to have sculpted pecs or simply to be able to play Twister with your kids on the living room floor.


What are the muscles of the chest?
There are three primary muscles that make up the chest:
pectoralis major
pectoralis minor
serratus anterior
A lesser-known muscle in the chest is called the subclavius. It is a smaller accessory muscle primarily involved in respiration (breathing) (2Trusted Source).
The pectoralis major is a unique muscle because it has two heads — the clavicular head and the sternocostal head. These are antagonistic to each other, which means that as one contracts, the other relaxes.
The clavicular head flexes the humerus, or upper arm bone, by raising your arm in front of you. It also adducts the humerus — which means it brings the arm inward toward the body’s midline — and assists in internal rotation of the same bone.
The sternocostal head, on the other hand, brings the arm down from a forward or flexed position. It’s also involved in movements such as horizontal adduction (as if you were bear-hugging someone) and internal rotation of the humerus.
The pectoralis minor’s job is to stabilize the shoulder blade by pulling it forward and down against the rib cage — an action known as protraction of the shoulder blade. It also assists with shoulder stability and respiration.
The serratus anterior has a sawlike origination on the outside front of the first through eighth ribs and ends on the medial border of the shoulder blade (closest to the spine). It pulls the shoulder blade around the ribs to prevent scapular winging, providing stability to the shoulder during pushing movements.
SUMMARY
There are three primary muscles comprise the chest. They are the pectoralis major, pectoralis minor, and serratus anterior.


Tips for defined chest muscles
“Muscle definition” is a challenging term. You may ask yourself, “What does that really mean?”
Well, muscles have to increase in size to be able to see their shape. This is called hypertrophy, and it involves progressively stressing the muscles past their resting state to induce growth. It occurs when the amount of protein used to build muscle exceeds the amount of protein breakdown that occurs (3Trusted Source).
However, you also need to decrease body fat to be able to see muscle definition. For people with breasts, it will likely be difficult to see much muscular definition in the chest.
Still, if muscle definition is your goal, you’ll need to work the chest muscles for hypertrophy but also decrease calories to see your muscles better. This will likely involve increasing calorie burn through aerobic exercise and managing your diet.
SUMMARY
Chest definition comes from both hypertrophy in the chest muscles and decreasing body fat to make them easier to see.


1. Incline push up (Bodyweight chest exercise)
Equipment required: none
This is a good warmup to prepare the chest for work. Research has shown that a dynamic warmup is helpful in preventing injury prior to training. Lower resistance movements related to those you are about to perform prepares the muscles for work (6Trusted Source).
Start with your hands on the wall or a countertop height surface. Walk your feet back so that your body makes roughly a 45 degree angle with the floor.
Keep your body straight and your spine neutral, and lower your chest to the surface you’re leaning against.
Pause for a moment, then return to the start position.
Make sure the resistance feels light enough to complete up to 20 repetitions. If you need to make it easier, step closer to your hands; to make it harder, step farther away.


5. Pushup (Bodyweight chest exercise)
Equipment required: none
Begin on your hands and knees, and step back into a high plank position. Your hands should be just wider than your shoulders, and your legs should be straight with your quads. Your hamstrings should be engaged and your spine neutral.
Keeping your core tight, bend your elbows at a 45-degree angle to lower your chest toward the floor, maintaining a straight line from head to heel.
Aim to go as low as you can without losing the support of your core or the alignment of your spine and pelvis.
Press your chest away from the ground until your elbows are straight.
Remember to keep your keep your hips in line with your shoulders and ankles. If this is too challenging to perform on your feet, you may do this exercise on your knees.
If you wish to increase the challenge, you can do a decline pushup by placing your toes on an elevated surface such as a bench or table.


6. Cable crossover (Machine chest exercise)
Equipment required: cable machine or a resistance band
Begin by standing away from a set of high pulley cable machine or a resistance band anchored overhead. Select a light to moderate weight to add challenge but give you success.
Grasp the hands (or the ends of the band) as you step forward with 1 foot. Keep enough tension and control on the handles to keep them in front of your chest.
Contract your chest muscles and bring the handles down and forward across your body at roughly belly button level. The hands can cross to add emphasis to the serratus anterior muscles.
Hold for a moment and then slowly return to the start. Then repeat.



7. Chest dip (Bodyweight chest exercise)
Equipment required: dip station
Stand facing the two parallel bars and grasp them, palms facing in.
Straighten your elbows and press into your hands, lifting your body up so that it is in line with your hands.
Then, bend your elbows and lower the chest toward your hands.
Pause, then press back to the start position. Repeat.



