1. Cable Crunch (Full gym access Core/Ab exercise)
Why: The cable crunch trains your abs through a full range of motion and allows you to progressively overload your entire core, making it a highly effective ab exercise. 
How to:
Set the pulley on a cable machine to a high setting and connect the rope attachment. 
Grab one end of the rope in each hand and kneel down 2-to-3 feet in front of the cable machine, pulling the rope down with you so that the ends of the rope are next to your ears.
Lean forward slightly, and using your abs, pull your elbows towards your knees. 
Reverse the movement and return to the starting position.


2. Weighted Sit-up (Bodyweight/Full gym access Core/Ab exercise)
Why: Like the cable crunch, the weighted sit-up allows you to progressively overload your abs, making it well-suited for gaining muscle and strength.
How to: 
Lie on a sit-up bench with your feet wedged under the foot pads. 
Using both hands, hold a weight plate directly above your chest with your arms straight (or hold the weight against your chest with your arms crossed). 
Keeping your arms perpendicular to the floor and your back flat, use your ab muscles to lift your chest toward the ceiling until your lower back comes off the bench.
Reverse the movement and return to the starting position.


3. Captain’s Chair Leg Raise (Full gym access Core/Ab exercise)
Why: Research shows that exercises that involve bringing the pelvis toward the chest, such as the captain’s chair leg raise, are best for training the lower abs, which is important if you want to build an aesthetic six-pack.
How to: 
Position yourself in a captain’s chair station so your back is resting against the back pad and your forearms are resting on the arms pads
Grab the handles and let your feet hang toward the floor. 
Lift your feet toward the ceiling, keeping your legs as straight as possible and your back pressed against the pad.
Once your legs are slightly above parallel to the floor, reverse the movement and return to the starting position.
Tip: If you aren’t strong enough to do the exercise with straight legs, perform it by bringing your knees upward first, so that your thighs are parallel to the floor. As you get stronger over time, work toward performing the exercise with straight legs.
 

4. Hanging Leg Raise (Bodyweight/Full gym access Core/Ab exercise)
Why: Like the captain’s chair leg raise, the hanging leg raise is a great way to train your lower abs. In this case, your entire core has to stabilize your body and prevent it from swinging, making it an outstanding exercise for training your abs and developing a strong core. 
How to: 
Grip a pull-up bar with your palms facing away from you and slightly wider than shoulder-width apart, then lift up your feet so that you’re hanging with your arms straight. 
Lift your feet toward the ceiling, keeping your legs as straight as possible and without swinging your feet or knees. 
Lift your feet as high as you can, aiming to get your legs slightly above parallel to the floor. 
Reverse the movement and return to the starting position.
Tip: If you aren’t strong enough to do the exercise with straight legs, perform it by bringing your knees upward first, so that your thighs are parallel to the floor. As you get stronger over time, work toward performing the exercise with straight legs.