Barbell Back Squat (Full gym access leg exercise):
How: Position a barbell in a squat rack at about the height of your nipples. Step under the bar, pinch your shoulder blades together, and rest the bar directly above the bony ridges on the bottom of your shoulder blades. Lift the bar out of the rack, take one or two steps backward, and place your feet a little wider than shoulder-width apart with your toes pointing slightly outward. Sit down and remember to keep your back straight and push your knees out in the same direction as your toes throughout each rep, then stand up and return to the starting position.
Why: The barbell back squat is the ideal starting point for any hypertrophy leg day routine because it allows you to lift heavy weights safely and progress regularly, which is vital for gaining size and strength.


Romanian Deadlift (Full gym access leg/hamstring exercise):
How: Stand up straight holding a loaded barbell with a shoulder-width grip and your hands facing toward you. Flatten your back and lower the weights toward the floor in a straight line while keeping your legs mostly straight, allowing your butt to move backward as you descend.
Once you feel a stretch in your hamstrings, bend your knees slightly more, and continue lowering the weights until your lower back begins to round—just below the knees for most people, and about mid-shin for those who are particularly flexible. Reverse the movement and return to the starting position.
Why: The Romanian deadlift (RDL) trains the posterior chain in a very similar way to the conventional deadlift. However, because of the difference in form, you put a greater emphasis on your hamstrings and glutes rather than your back. It’s also considerably less fatiguing than the conventional deadlift, which means you can do it more often without wearing yourself to a frazzle. 


Bulgarian Split Squat (Dumbbell/Full gym access leg exercise):
How: While holding a dumbbell in each hand, stand about two-to-three feet in front of a bench with your back to the bench. With your right foot (and heel in particular) firmly planted, place the top of your left foot on the bench behind you. Look at a spot on the floor six-to-ten feet in front of you and lower your butt toward the floor by bending at your right knee. Keep lowering yourself until your right thigh is roughly parallel with the floor. Stand up and return to the starting position.
Why: Research shows that the dumbbell Bulgarian split squat is a great exercise for training the glutes and the quads. Because the Bulgarian split squat trains just one leg at a time, it’s particularly useful for finding and fixing muscle or strength imbalances.


Seated Calf Raise (Full gym access leg/calf exercise):
How: While seated, adjust the thigh pad so that it rests just above your knee and place the balls of your feet on the footplate. Lift the pad slightly by pointing your toes, and use the safety handle to release the weight. While keeping your feet on the footplate, lower the weight as far as possible by letting your heels move toward the floor. Then, push through the balls of your feet to elevate the thigh pad as high as you can.
Why: It’s sensible to include the seated calf raise in any good leg workout for mass because training your calves helps you calves run faster, jump higher and further, and improve stability during lower-body exercises like the squat and deadlift. It also helps improve your muscular proportions to achieve a more symmetrical, “aesthetic” physique.