1. Barbell Bench Press (Full gym access chest exercise)
Why: The barbell bench press is one of the single best chest exercises for mass because it hits the upper, mid, and lower portions of the chest and allows you to train with heavy weights and progress regularly. That’s why all good chest day workout routines begin with the bench press. 
How to:
Lie on a flat bench and place your feet flat on the floor. 
Pull your shoulder blades together and down, and without lifting your butt or shoulders off the bench, slightly arch your back. 
Grab the bar with a slightly wider than shoulder-width grip and unrack the barbell.
Lower the barbell to your chest, keeping your elbows tucked 6-to-8 inches from your sides.
Press the bar back to the starting position.
Expert Tip: As you set up for the bench press, imagine screwing your feet into the floor by turning your toes out to the side. This creates tension in your legs, which increases the stability and rigidity of your entire body and ensures you don’t waste energy trying to maintain balance.


2. Incline Barbell Bench Press  (Full gym access chest exercise)
Why: The incline barbell bench press is part of most great chest workouts for mass because nothing trains your “upper chest” more effectively. In other words, it’s the best chest exercise for “filling out” your entire pecs.
How to:
Lie on a bench angled at 30-to-45 degrees and plant your feet on the floor. 
Pull your shoulder blades together and down, and without lifting your butt or shoulders off the bench, slightly arch your back. 
Grab the bar with a slightly wider than shoulder-width grip and unrack the barbell.
Lower the barbell to your upper chest, keeping your elbows tucked 6-to-8 inches from your sides.
Press the bar back to the starting position.
Expert Tip: Think about snapping the barbell in half with your hands. The goal here is to maintain upper body rigidity, which helps you lift heavier weights safely.


3. Dumbbell Bench Press  (Dumbbell chest exercise)
Why: Most good chest workout routines for mass include the dumbbell bench press because it trains the upper, mid, and lower portions of the pecs and each side of your body independently. This makes it ideal for developing balanced, symmetrical size. It also trains your pecs through a slightly longer range of motion than barbell presses, which further benefits mass gain.
How to:
While sitting on a flat bench, hold a dumbbell in each hand and rest them on your thighs. 
Lie back and bring the dumbbells up so you’re holding them on either side of your chest by giving them a nudge with your thighs.
Press the dumbbells over your chest until your arms are straight and your elbows are locked. 
Lower the dumbbells to the starting position.
Expert Tip: Exercises that train each side of your body independently—”unilateral exercises”—are typically better for boosting athletic performance than bilateral exercises (exercises that train both sides simultaneously). Therefore, if you’re looking for an effective chest exercise for athletes, the dumbbell bench press is a sensible choice. 


4. Incline Dumbbell Bench Press (Dumbbell chest exercise)
Why: The incline dumbbell bench press is one of the best chest exercises for building your upper pecs and creating a fuller, more balanced chest
How to:
While lying on a bench angled at 30-to-45 degrees, hold a dumbbell in each hand and rest them on your thighs. 
Lie back, hoisting the dumbbells up so you’re holding them on either side of your chest by giving them a nudge with your thighs.
Press the dumbbells over your upper chest until your arms are straight and your elbows are locked.
Lower the dumbbells to the starting position.
Expert Tip: Set the bench to a 45-degree angle or lower to ensure your pecs do the majority of the work, not your shoulders.


6. Dip (Full gym access chest exercise)
Why: The dip trains your pecs through a full range of motion and while deeply stretched, which benefits growth. It also likely trains the lower pecs slightly better than other chest exercises, so it’s useful for rounding out pec development. 
How to:
If you’re using a dip belt, wrap the chain around your waist, add the desired amount of weight to the chain, and fasten the carabiner.
Grab both handles of a dip station, then press yourself up by straightening your arms and gently jumping off the ground so your arms are straight and supporting your entire body weight. 
Slightly bend your knees to keep your feet from touching the ground, then lower your body by bending your elbows until your upper arms are roughly parallel to the floor.
Reverse the movement and return to the starting position.
Expert Tip: To emphasize the pecs, lean slightly forward while performing the dip. 


7. High-to-Low Cable Fly (Full gym access chest exercise)
Why: The high-to-low cable fly is a useful exercise for finishing a chest program for mass because it allows you to train the pecs with the volume (sets) they need to grow without other muscle groups becoming the limiting factor. Like the dip, it also may emphasize the lower pecs, which is important for balanced growth.
How to:
Adjust both pulleys on a dual cable machine to shoulder height and attach the single-handle attachments. 
Grab a handle in each hand and stand centrally between the pulleys so that the cables pull your arms out to your sides. 
Maintaining a slight bend in your elbows, take 1-to-2 steps forward so your arms are a little behind your torso with your palms facing forward.
Keeping your elbows slightly bent, bring your hands toward each other in an arc.
Reverse the movement and return to the starting position. 
Expert Tip: Increase the range of motion by allowing your hands to cross over each other in front of your chest. If necessary, turn your wrists so your palms face down as your hands cross to prevent the handles from hitting each other.