1. Incline push up (Bodyweight chest exercise)
Equipment required: none
How to: 
This is a good warmup to prepare the chest for work. Research has shown that a dynamic warmup is helpful in preventing injury prior to training. Lower resistance movements related to those you are about to perform prepares the muscles for work (6Trusted Source).
Start with your hands on the wall or a countertop height surface. Walk your feet back so that your body makes roughly a 45 degree angle with the floor.
Keep your body straight and your spine neutral, and lower your chest to the surface you’re leaning against.
Pause for a moment, then return to the start position.
Make sure the resistance feels light enough to complete up to 20 repetitions. If you need to make it easier, step closer to your hands; to make it harder, step farther away.


5. Pushup (Bodyweight chest exercise)
Equipment required: none
How to: 
Begin on your hands and knees, and step back into a high plank position. Your hands should be just wider than your shoulders, and your legs should be straight with your quads. Your hamstrings should be engaged and your spine neutral.
Keeping your core tight, bend your elbows at a 45-degree angle to lower your chest toward the floor, maintaining a straight line from head to heel.
Aim to go as low as you can without losing the support of your core or the alignment of your spine and pelvis.
Press your chest away from the ground until your elbows are straight.
Remember to keep your keep your hips in line with your shoulders and ankles. If this is too challenging to perform on your feet, you may do this exercise on your knees.
If you wish to increase the challenge, you can do a decline pushup by placing your toes on an elevated surface such as a bench or table.


7. Chest dip (Bodyweight chest exercise)
Equipment required: dip station
How to: 
Stand facing the two parallel bars and grasp them, palms facing in.
Straighten your elbows and press into your hands, lifting your body up so that it is in line with your hands.
Then, bend your elbows and lower the chest toward your hands.
Pause, then press back to the start position. Repeat.