You can strengthen your back with exercises, including bent-over rows, pullups, back extensions, and more. These different exercises target and strengthen different muscles in the back.
If you’ve ever had back pain, you know just how frustrating it can be — and you’re not alone. In 2020, low back pain affected 619 million peopleTrusted Source globally. It is estimated that cases will increase to 843 million by 2050.
And because almost every movement your body makes somehow engages your back, this pain can damper your activities. Strengthening your back muscles is one way to help manage or even prevent nonspecific back pain and improve range of motion.
When we talk about your back, which muscles are we targeting? Primary muscles in the back include the:
latissimus dorsi (lats), which are in the area below your armpits down the sides of your back
rhomboids, which are in the mid-upper back
trapezius (traps), which run from your neck to your mid-back
erector spinae, which run along your spine
All the exercises below target a combination of these muscles and may also target other upper body muscles in your shoulders, chest, and arms.


Lat pulldown (Full gym access back exercise)
Why it’s on the list: The lat pulldown is a great staple exercise for building a strong back. You can complete a lat pulldown on a machine at the gym or with a resistance band.
Muscles worked: As you can probably guess, lat pulldowns mainly target the latissimus dorsi, a large muscle located in the middle and lower back. This exercise also targets the trapezius, rotator cuff, posterior deltoids, rhomboids, biceps, and forearms.
How to:
If you’re using a machine, position the pad so it’s touching your thighs. Stand up and grab the bar with hands wider than shoulder-width apart, then sit back down.
Begin to pull the bar down toward your chest, bending your elbows and pointing them toward the floor. Engage your upper back and mid-back throughout the move. Keep your torso straight, and don’t allow yourself to lean back.
Complete 1–3 sets of 8–12 reps.


Single-arm dumbbell row (Dumbbell/Full gym access back exercise)
Why it’s on the list: Stabilizing yourself on a bench to perform a single-arm row allows you to target those back muscles. Challenge yourself by adding some weight here — while remaining aware of your form, of course.
Muscles worked: This move emphasizes your latissimus dorsi, teres minor, teres major, posterior deltoids, rhomboids, and trapezius. It can also help you improve muscular imbalances by targeting each side individually.
How to:
Position yourself on a bench so your left knee and shin are resting on it, as well as your left hand — this will be your support. Your right leg should be straight with your foot on the floor. Pick up a dumbbell with your right hand. Maintain a straight torso.
Pull the dumbbell up, aiming your elbow toward the sky while keeping it close to your body. Squeeze your upper back as you bend your elbow.
Slowly lower back down to the starting position. Complete 1–3 sets of 8–12 reps on each side.


Pull up (Bodyweight/Full gym access back exercise)
Why it’s on the list: A classic back exercise, the unassisted pull up requires a lot of strength and can be a challenge. If you’re not quite there yet, bring in reinforcements by using a pull up band to work on the exercise.
Muscles worked: latissimus dorsi, trapezius, rhomboids, pectoralis major, shoulders, forearms, erector spinae, and obliques
How to:
Grab a pullup bar with an overhand grip, placing your hands wider than shoulder-width apart.
Lift your feet off the floor — or place them in the assist band — and hang from your arms.
Pull your body up to the bar by bending your arms and pulling your shoulder blades toward the floor.
Once your chin crosses the bar, lower your body back down.


Smith machine row (Full gym access back exercise)
Why it’s on the list: Similar to a barbell row, this exercise is great for targeting your upper back. Many people prefer using a Smith machine because it balances the weight for you, allowing you to focus on lifting with your upper back muscles.
Muscles worked: This move mostly targets the latissimus dorsi but also strengthens the trapezius and posterior deltoids.
How to:
Stand behind the Smith machine bar with your feet shoulder-width apart.
Hinge at your hips, slightly bend your knees, and maintain a neutral spine.
Place your hands over the bar with an overhand grip, a little wider than shoulder-width apart.
Pull the bar up toward your chest by squeezing your shoulder blades together. Avoid using your arms to do most of the work.
Slowly return the bar to the starting position.


Seated cable row (Full gym access back exercise)
Why it’s on the list: Seated rows keep your muscles under tension throughout the entire exercise, helping to build a strong back.
Muscles worked: This exercise is great for targeting your latissimus dorsi and rhomboids. It will also target other muscles, such as the trapezius and biceps.
How to:
Adjust the cable row seat so that the handles are at chest height.
Sit up straight and place your feet flat on the floor or on the foot supports.
Grab the handles and hold them in front of you with your arms extended.
Pull the handles toward your chest by squeezing your shoulder blades and drawing your elbows back. Keep your elbows close to your body.
Return to the starting position with slow, controlled movement.


Dumbbell Chest-supported row (Dumbbell/Full gym access back exercise)
Why it’s on the list: Another great variation of the row is the chest-supported row. By leaning against a bench, you can focus on using your lats to pull the weight back. This may also help you lift more weight.
Muscles worked: This move mainly targets the latissimus dorsi.
How to:
Position an adjustable exercise bench so that the backrest is at a 45-degree angle.
Grab a pair of dumbbells and sit on the bench with your chest is facing the backrest.
Plant your feet on the floor, engage your core, and slowly lean forward until your chest is against the backrest.
Holding a dumbbell in each hand, extend your elbows and let your arms hang straight down. This is the starting position.
At the same time, squeeze your shoulder blades and bend your elbows to bring the dumbbells toward your rib cage.
Slowly reverse the movement to return to the starting position.


SOURCES:
Guide to good posture. (2017). https://medlineplus.gov/guidetogoodposture.html
Low back pain. (2023). https://www.who.int/news-room/fact-sheets/detail/low-back-painTrusted Source
Tataryn N, et al. (2021). Posterior-chain resistance training compared to general exercise and walking programmes for the treatment of chronic low back pain in the general population: A systematic review and meta-analysis. https://sportsmedicine-open.springeropen.com/articles/10.1186/s40798-021-00306-w