1. Close-Grip Bench Press (Full gym access tricep exercise)
How to:
Lie on a flat bench and place your feet flat on the floor. 
Pull your shoulder blades together and down, and without lifting your butt or shoulders off the bench, slightly arch your back. 
Grip the barbell with a shoulder-width grip or slightly narrower and unrack it.
Lower the barbell to your lower chest, keeping your elbows tucked 2-to-4 inches from your sides.
Press the bar back to the starting position.
Why: The close-grip bench press is one of the best arm workout exercises because it allows you to lift heavy weights safely and progress regularly, making it ideal for gaining size and strength.


2. Tricep Dips (Bodyweight/Full gym access tricep exercise)
How to: 
If you’re using a dip belt, wrap the chain around your waist, add the desired amount of weight to the chain, and fasten the carabiner.
Grab both handles of a dip station, then press yourself up by gently jumping off the ground and straightening your arms so they support your weight. 
Keep your body upright to emphasize your triceps, bend your knees to keep your feet from touching the ground, and lower your body by bending your elbows until your upper arms are roughly parallel to the floor.
Press into the handles to return to the starting position.
Why: Dips are an excellent triceps exercise when you perform them with an upright torso. When you start doing dips in your arm day workouts, you can make great progress with just your body weight, but as you get stronger, you’ll want to add weight using a dip belt.


3. JM Press (Full gym access arm exercise)
How to: 
Lie on a flat bench, pull your shoulder blades together and down, and without lifting your butt or shoulders off the bench, slightly arch your back.
Grip the barbell with a slightly narrower than shoulder-width grip, unrack it, and move it over your chest.
Lower the barbell toward your neck, keeping your elbows up and in front of your torso, and slightly bend your wrists backward so that your palms face the ceiling.
When your forearms and biceps touch, press the bar back to the starting position.
Why: The JM press is one of the best lifts for arm strength because it allows you to develop pressing power even when your chest is bushed from heavy benching. 


4. Overhead Triceps Extension (Full gym access tricep exercise)
How to: 
Sit up straight on a bench. 
Grip one end of a dumbbell and lift it overhead.
Lower the weight until it’s behind your head by bending your elbows.
Straighten your arms and return to the starting position.
Why: The overhead triceps extension is an excellent addition to an arm day workout for mass because it trains the triceps (and especially the triceps long head) when stretched, which aids growth.


5. Cable Triceps Pressdown (Full gym access tricep exercise)
How to:
Set the pulley on a cable machine to slightly above head height and attach the rope attachment.
Stand upright or lean slightly forward, grab one end of the rope in each hand, and push the rope downward by straightening your elbows. 
Reverse the movement and return to the starting position.
Why: The triceps pushdown should be part of your triceps-focussed arm day workouts because it trains all three heads of the triceps through a long range of motion, so it’s excellent for gaining muscle and strength.


6. Skullcrusher (Dumbbell/Full gym access tricep Exercise)
Skullcrusher
How:
While lying on a flat bench, hold an EZ Bar above your chest with a shoulder-width grip. 
Bring the bar down to your forehead by bending at the elbows.
Extend your arms and return to the starting position.
Why: The skullcrusher is a great arm day exercise to include in your mass-building workouts because it trains the slightly smaller medial and lateral heads of the triceps, ensuring you have defined, proportional upper arms.


7. Pull-up (Bodyweight/Full gym access back/bicep exercise)
How to:
Grab a pull-up bar slightly wider than shoulder-width apart with your palms facing away from you.
Lift your feet so that you’re hanging with your arms straight. 
Pull your body up until your chin is above the bar.
Reverse the movement and return to the starting position.
Why: Research shows that vertical pulling exercises, like the pull-up, are great biceps builders, and they’re easier to load with heavy weights than other arm exercises that isolate the biceps.


8. Chin-up (Bodyweight/Full gym access bicep/back exercise)
How to: 
Grab a pull-up bar with your hands around shoulder-width apart and your palms facing you.
Lift your feet so that you’re hanging with your arms straight.
Pull your body up until your chin is above the bar.
Reverse the movement and return to the starting position.
Why: The chin-up is perfect for a big arms workout because it trains the biceps to a high degree and lets you handle heavy weights.  


9. Barbell Curl (Dumbbell/Full gym access bicep Exercise)
How to: 
While standing up straight, grip a barbell shoulder-width apart with your palms facing away from you. Your arms should be straight and the bar should be resting against your thighs. 
Curl the weight up to shoulder height by bending at the elbow.
Reverse the movement and return to the starting position.
Why: Barbell curls are one of the best lifts for arms because they allow you to train your biceps through a full range of motion with heavy weights. 


10. Incline Dumbbell Curl (Dumbbell/Full gym access bicep Exercise)
How to: 
While holding a dumbbell in each hand, sit back on an incline bench set to 45 degrees and let your arms hang straight down with your palms facing each other.
Bend your right elbow to curl the weight toward your right shoulder, rotating your wrist so your palm faces your shoulder at the top of the rep. 
Lower the dumbbell to the starting position, then repeat the pattern with your left hand to complete one full rep.
Why: The incline dumbbell curl is an outstanding arm day exercise because it places high tension on the biceps throughout the entire range of motion and trains them while fully stretched, which is important for growth.


11. Dumbbell Biceps Curl (Dumbbell/Full gym access bicep Exercise)
How to:
Stand with your feet shoulder-width apart and knees slightly bent, holding a dumbbell in each hand at your sides and your palms facing your thighs.
Bend your right elbow to curl your right hand toward your right shoulder, rotating your wrist so your palm faces your shoulder at the top of the rep. 
Straighten your arm and return to the starting position, then repeat the pattern with your left hand to complete one full rep.
Why: Dumbbell biceps curls are a staple in any good arm workout routine because they’re easy to learn and perform, and they train your entire biceps through a full range of motion. 


12. Hammer Curl (Dumbbell/Full gym access bicep Exercise)
How to: 
Stand with your feet shoulder-width apart, holding a dumbbell in each hand at your sides and your palms facing your thighs.
Without twisting your wrist, bend your right elbow to curl your right hand toward your right shoulder.
Reverse the movement and return to the starting position, then repeat the pattern with your left hand to complete one full rep.
Why: The hammer curl emphasizes the brachialis—a small muscle that can help to push up the biceps brachii—making your upper arms look bigger and improving your biceps “peak.”


Sources:
[1] Kholinne, Erica, et al. “The Different Role of Each Head of the Triceps Brachii Muscle in Elbow Extension.” Acta Orthopaedica et Traumatologica Turcica, vol. 52, no. 3, 1 May 2018, pp. 201–205, www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6136322/, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.aott.2018.02.005.
[2] Gentil, Paulo, et al. “Single vs. Multi-Joint Resistance Exercises: Effects on Muscle Strength and Hypertrophy.” Asian Journal of Sports Medicine, vol. 6, no. 1, 22 Mar. 2015, www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4592763/, https://doi.org/10.5812/asjsm.24057.
[3] Youdas, James W, et al. “Surface Electromyographic Activation Patterns and Elbow Joint Motion during a Pull-Up, Chin-Up, or Perfect-PullupTM Rotational Exercise.” Journal of Strength and Conditioning Research, vol. 24, no. 12, Dec. 2010, pp. 3404–3414, https://doi.org/10.1519/jsc.0b013e3181f1598c.
[4] de França, Henrique Silvestre, et al. “The Effects of Adding Single-Joint Exercises to a Multi-Joint Exercise Resistance Training Program on Upper Body Muscle Strength and Size in Trained Men.” Applied Physiology, Nutrition, and Metabolism, vol. 40, no. 8, Aug. 2015, pp. 822–826, https://doi.org/10.1139/apnm-2015-0109.
[5] Oliveira, Liliam F., et al. “Effect of the Shoulder Position on the Biceps Brachii Emg in Different Dumbbell Curls.” Journal of Sports Science & Medicine, vol. 8, no. 1, 1 Mar. 2009, pp. 24–29, www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3737788/.
