The Best Bodyweight Workouts and Exercises You Can Do
Michael Matthews
Written by Michael Matthews, certified personal trainer, bestselling author & founder of Legion
Scientifically reviewed by Dr. Brian Grant, DPT, PT, OCS, CSCS
Updated on May 8, 2019


Bodyweight exercises are exercises that train your muscles using your bodyweight instead of weighted instruments.
While bodyweight exercises can help you gain muscle and strength and get in shape, they aren’t as effective as heavy, compound weightlifting.
If you want to work out from home, are constantly traveling, or simply don’t like working out at a gym, bodyweight exercises are a good alternative to traditional methods of resistance training.
Bodyweight exercises are one of the simplest ways to get into resistance training.
They don’t require barbells, dumbbells, or gym memberships, they’re easy to learn, they can be done anywhere, and they can help you get into great shape.


According to some people, bodyweight exercises are not only all you need to gain all the muscle and strength you could want, they’re also better for burning calories and fat than other forms of resistance training and are a more “functional” way to get fit.
How true are those claims? Can you really build the body of your dreams in your living room?
The short answer is this:
While bodyweight workouts can help you get in shape, and especially if you’re new to resistance training, they aren’t as effective for muscle and strength gain as heavy, compound barbell and dumbbell training.


Bodyweight exercises are exercises that train your muscles using your bodyweight instead of weighted instruments.
Typically, when people say “bodyweight exercise,” they’re referring to simple movements like pushups, chinups, situps, and the like. This label can also apply to more advanced exercises like gymnastics or parkour, however.
Most of the time, bodyweight exercises involve doing sets of a relatively high number of reps (15+) to failure.
This is more out of necessity than design, since the amount of resistance more or less stays the same over time (your body weight). Thus, you usually have to progress toward doing more and more volume (reps) and not intensity (load).
That said, you can increase the intensity of some bodyweight exercises by positioning your body differently to make the movement more difficult.
For example, if you reach a point where you can do dozens of pushups on your hands and knees, you can start doing them on your hands and feet, which is harder. And once you can do dozens in this position, you can start doing them with your feet elevated on a bench or chair, which is harder still.
Summary: Bodyweight exercises are exercises that train your muscles using your bodyweight instead of weighted instruments.


Bodyweight workouts have several advantages over weightlifting as well, including:
Convenience and flexibility (you can do them at home, on the road, etc.).
Affordability (no gym membership or home gym needed).
Time efficiency (no driving to the gym, waiting for equipment, etc.).
If you’re looking to “stay fit” (build some muscle and strength and stay lean), and you don’t like gyms or can’t get to one, bodyweight workouts might be perfect for you.
This is particularly true of people who are new to resistance training and whose bodies are hyperresponsive to its muscle-building effects. This “honeymoon phase” only lasts about six months for most people, though.
If you’re looking to build a large amount of muscle and strength as quickly as possible, they’re not the best choice.
This is because bodyweight exercises have limited value as a training method.
The main reason for this has to do with something called “progressive overload,” which is the primary driver of strength and muscle gains.
Progressive overload refers to increasing the amount of tension your muscles produce over time, and the most effective way to do this is by progressively increasing the amount of weight that you’re lifting.
This is why strength is highly correlated with muscle size. You’d be hard pressed to find a guy with small legs that can squat double his body weight for reps, for example.
When viewed through this lens of progressive overload, we can clearly see a major drawback to bodyweight training:
It tends to focus on increasing repetitions but not weight, and this is great for building muscle endurance, but not size and strength.
As mentioned earlier, the only ways to progress on bodyweight exercises are to do more reps or make the exercise harder.
For example, if you can currently do 10 pushups in a set before failing, one way to progress would be working your way up to doing 20, 30, or more reps per set.
Unfortunately, this type of progression won’t produce nearly as much muscle growth as, let’s say, working up to bench pressing and military pressing 1.5 and 1 times your body weight, respectively.
Researchers call this the “strength-endurance continuum,” which is a long-winded phrase for a simple concept: if you want to get big and strong, you need to prioritize resistance training with heavy loads.
Now, there are ways to incorporate progressive overload into your bodyweight workouts, which we’ll be talking more about soon, but they don’t fully offset this disadvantage.
Another handicap with bodyweight workouts is you miss out on several powerful muscle-building exercises.
There are no bodyweight exercises that can fully reproduce the whole-body muscle-building effects of heavy squatting, deadlifting, bench pressing, and military pressing.
The significance of these four exercises is they form the core of every great weightlifting and strength training program, and for a good reason:
They train many muscle groups at once and they allow for very heavy weights to be handled safely, which produces maximum progressive overload.
The bottom line is any resistance training program—bodyweight or otherwise—that’s missing any of these movements would benefit from including them.
You can make do with exercises that we’ll discuss soon, but anyone that says that you can duplicate the level of muscle activation from an 85% of one-rep max deadlift with a bodyweight movement is lying.


Some people’s bodies respond incredibly well to resistance training and others respond quite poorly.
If you’re taking advice from a high-responder but are yourself a low- or even middling-responder, your bottom-line results are going to differ greatly from theirs.
Simply put, what worked remarkably well for someone else can leave you disappointed, and this is especially true of bodyweight exercises because they don’t emphasize progressive overload as effectively as heavy, compound weightlifting.
And the other side of that coin is even if you’re a high-responder and can get more than most out of bodyweight training, you can get much more still out of traditional weightlifting.
Summary: Bodyweight exercises can help you gain strength and muscle, but they aren’t as effective as heavy, compound weightlifting.



Are Bodyweight Workouts Good for Burning Fat?
No.
To understand why, you first have to understand that building a great body isn’t just about losing fat. It’s about improving your body composition, which requires building muscle and losing fat.
We already know that bodyweight exercises aren’t the most effective way to build muscle, but what you might not know is diet and not exercise (of any kind) is what really drives fat loss.
In other words, while exercise supports fat loss, it doesn’t automatically make you leaner all on its own. To do that, you must pair it with proper dieting, and specifically, with a calorie deficit, which is accomplished by eating fewer calories than you burn over time.
The key point here is this:
So long as you maintain a calorie deficit, you’ll lose fat regardless of whether you’re exercising. And as a corollary, no matter how much exercise you do, your body fat percentage won’t change until you’re in a calorie deficit.
The reasons for this are simple:
Exercise doesn’t burn enough energy to really move the fat loss needle.
It’s too easy to eat back the calories you burn in your workouts.
For instance, a vigorous one-hour workout of any kind will burn anywhere from 400 to 1,000 calories. This may sound like a lot, but consider the following:
On the low end, that’s the amount of calories in a banana, cup of yogurt, and handful of almonds, and on the high end, that’s a “fully loaded” Chipotle burrito with chicken, guacamole, cheese, rice, and beans.
You need to burn around 3,500 more calories than you eat over a given period of time to lose a pound of fat.
That’s why the additional calories you can burn with bodyweight workouts is negligible as far as fat loss is concerned. How much of a difference is an extra couple hundred calories burned per week really going to make? Little to none.
This also highlights a point I often make: the primary reason to work out isn’t to merely burn calories or fat but to improve body composition by gaining muscle and strength. As for reducing body fat levels, that’s primarily a function of diet, and specifically, of energy and macronutrient balance.
And yes, that applies just as much to women who don’t want to get “bulky” as men who want to get as jacked as possible.
So, in the final analysis, bodyweight exercises are inferior to traditional strength training workouts when you’re dieting for fat loss for two reasons:
While bodyweight workouts can burn more calories than strength training workouts, it’s not enough to make a big difference in terms of fat loss.
While bodyweight workouts can help you gain muscle and strength, strength training workouts accomplish this far better and thus are superior for improving your body composition.
Summary: Bodyweight exercises can help you burn calories and maintain or gain muscle while dieting to lose fat, but heavy, traditional weightlifting workouts burn nearly as many calories and are more effective for maintaining and gaining muscle.


If you go searching for bodyweight exercises and routines, you’ll quickly be overwhelmed by the sheer volume of choices.
The good news, though, is out of the hundreds and hundreds of body weight exercises you could do, a small minority deliver the vast majority of potential benefits.
As you’ll see, your primary focus in bodyweight workouts is improving in a few basic areas: pushing, pulling, and squatting.
There are many variations of these movements and ways to make them more difficult, of course, but they are the foundation of all good bodyweight training.
As you’ll see, many of the best bodyweight exercises are simply progressions on the bread and butter exercises like pushups, squats, and pullups.
A progression is an exercise you progress to once you’ve built considerable strength on a previous, easier variation of that exercise.
On the other hand, a regression is an easier version of an exercise. For example, chinup holds are a regression from the regular chinup.
So, let’s review the best of these types of bodyweight exercises and then look at how we can combine them into an effective and challenging workout routine.
The Best Upper Body Bodyweight Exercises



The Pushup (Bodyweight chest/shoulders/triceps exercise)
No bodyweight workout is complete without some form of pushup.
It’s one of the simplest and most effective ways to train your chest, shoulders, and arms, and it doesn’t require any special equipment.
I’m going to recommend that you do several types of pushups in your bodyweight workouts.



The Pike Pushup (Bodyweight shoulders exercise)
The pike pushup is a pushup variation that’s great for training the shoulders.
To do the pike pushup, you setup in a standard pushup position, then raise your butt into the air so that your arms are in line with your torso.
To begin the rep, lower your head toward the ground while keeping your butt as high as possible, then reverse the movement to return to the starting position.



The Dive Bomber Pushup (Bodyweight chest/shoulders/triceps exercise)
The dive bomber pushup is a good progression from the pike pushup.
It’s a complete upper body exercise because it emphasizes your chest, shoulders, and triceps at different points in the movement.



The Handstand Pushup (Bodyweight chest/shoulders/triceps exercise)
In terms of bodyweight shoulder exercises, it’s hard to beat the handstand pushup for sheer difficulty (and thus overload).
The downside, of course, is that it’s also very difficult.
Not only does it require a fair amount of upper body strength, it also requires a fair amount of balance and coordination. Save this for after you’ve mastered the other pushup variations.



The Foot-Elevated Pushup (Bodyweight chest/shoulders/triceps exercise)
The foot-elevated pushup is a simple variation of the standard pushup that involves positioning the feet on a bench or chair that’s about knee-height off the ground.
This puts more weight on your arms, which makes the exercise significantly harder.



The Dip (Bodyweight chest/triceps exercise)
I want to shy away from exercises that require special equipment, but I need to mention the dip because it’s one of the absolute best upper body exercises you can do, bodyweight or otherwise.
(Dips are an important part of my weightlifting programs, too: Bigger Leaner Stronger for men and Thinner Leaner Stronger for women.)
There are two types of dips you can do: triceps (aka bench) dips and chest dips.
Triceps (bench) dips are easier, and here’s how they look:
You can do these on any bench, chair, or table that’s anywhere from knee to waist height off the ground
If you’re strong enough to do six or more reps of the chest dip then you don’t need to worry about the easier triceps version.



The Pullup (Bodyweight back/bicep exercise)
Even though it requires some specialized equipment, a pullup bar is cheap and, in my opinion, vital.
I say that because if you want to get the most out of your bodyweight training, you must be doing chinups and pullups.
They train every major muscle in your back and involve the biceps to a significant degree as well, and they do it in a way that just can’t be replicated otherwise (outside of the gym, that is).
There are many pullup variations you can do, of course, but you should build a foundation of strength with the standard version before progressing to more advanced types.



The Chinup (Bodyweight back/biceps exercise)
The chinup is a variation of the pullup that involves gripping the bar with your palms facing you (a supinated grip) instead of away from you (a pronated grip).
This exercise trains most of the same muscles as the pullup, but emphasizes the biceps more than pullups, which emphasize your back muscles.



The Bodyweight Squat (Bodyweight leg exercise)
Just about every popular resistance training program you can find involves some sort of squatting.
It’s the simplest and most effective leg-building exercise you can do.
This exercise is the bodyweight equivalent of the barbell back squat, and if you want to build strong legs, you want to do a lot of it.



The Squat Jump (Bodyweight leg exercise)
The squat jump is a progression from the basic bodyweight squat that adds a dynamic “explosive” element to your training.
While this won’t necessarily increase the effectiveness of the exercise, it’s a fun variation to use when regular bodyweight squats get stale.



The Shrimp Squat (Bodyweight leg exercise)
The Shrimp Squat is a good introduction to one-legged squatting (which is a good progression from two-legged variations).



The Pistol Squat (Bodyweight leg exercise)
The pistol squat is a difficult progression from the shrimp squat that requires a considerable amount of strength and balance.



The Lunge (Bodyweight leg/quadriceps exercise)
The lunge is primarily a quadriceps exercise, but all the major muscle groups of the lower body come into play, including the glutes, calves, and hamstrings.



The Russian Leg Curl (Bodyweight leg/hamstring exercise)
The Russian leg curl is a fantastic exercise for isolating your hamstrings.
It’s more or less the same movement that you’d do using a hamstring curl machine, but instead you use your own body weight.



The Hanging Leg Raise (Bodyweight core/abs exercise)
The hanging leg raise is one of my favorite exercises for training the core (and the rectus abdominis in particular).



The Bicycle Crunch (Bodyweight core/abs exercise)
The bicycle crunch is a popular abs/core exercise that is particularly good for training the obliques.


And now a few odds and ends on how to do these workouts:
Take each set one to two reps shy of muscular failure.
Muscular failure refers to the point in a set when you’re unsure if you’ll be able to finish the next rep, and it’s a sign your muscles are close to their current limits.
You don’t have to go to absolute muscle failure every set to make progress, but you need to come close.


Rest one to two minutes between sets.
Yes, this is going to feel like a lot of standing around compared to the circuit training programs you see advertised on social media, but resting properly is a hugely important part of proper resistance training (bodyweight or otherwise).
These rest periods give your muscles enough time to muscles recoup their strength so you can give maximum effort each set.


Once you can do 20 reps of a given exercise in one set, progress to the harder variation of the exercise.
So, for example, once you can do 20 pike pushups, you then start doing dive bomber pushups for that and all future workouts. Once you can do 20 dive bombers, you start doing feet-elevated pushups instead.
In this way, your workouts will change over time.
And in the cases where there are no progressions (plain pushups and bodyweight squats, burpees, pullups, etc.), your goal is to simply increase the amount of total reps you can do in each set.
If you can’t do a pushup or chinup yet, start with a regression that you can do.
For example, if you can’t do one chinup yet, do chinup holds until you can do 20 and then progress to chinups.


Bodyweight exercises and workouts have many advantages but aren’t necessarily for everyone.
They’re a great way to get acquainted with resistance training, and they’re also a good option if you don’t want to or can’t consistently get to the gym.
Bodyweight exercises can help you gain muscle and strength, but they aren’t nearly as efficient or effective as traditional heavy weightlifting exercises like the squat, bench press, deadlift, and military press.
Bodyweight exercises are also good for burning calories and thus can help speed up fat loss. That said, traditional strength training workouts also burn a significant amount of calories and in the end, how quickly you lose fat is mostly dictated by diet, not exercise.
In other words, if you know what you’re doing with your diet, you can lose fat equally well with bodyweight workouts or strength training workouts.


