Bodyweight training is a popular and accessible method of improving your strength and conditioning with minimal to no equipment.
When it comes to building stronger legs, bodyweight training offers you a variety of options to target the muscles in your lower body.
Types of bodyweight leg exercises
Most variations of bodyweight leg exercises fall into one of the two following movement patterns:
squat pattern
lunge pattern
Within each of these movement patterns, certain exercises allow you to progress and improve your strength without relying on much, if any, external equipment.
Meanwhile, many other bodyweight leg exercises don’t neatly fit into these patterns. A few of these options are included after the squat and lunge pattern movements to add variety, warm up, and help improve your overall mobility.


Squat form and variations
The squat is arguably the king of lower body exercises. When it comes to building stronger hips and legs, squat variations are must-have exercises in your workout program.
Muscles trained with the squat
The squat movement pattern primarily trains the following muscles:
quadriceps
gluteus maximus
calves (soleus and gastrocnemius)
hamstrings
Squat exercises also require core stabilization, so you will strengthen the muscles of your core as well.
Bodyweight squat exercises have easier and harder variations.
If you’re new to training your legs, beginning with a chair squat is the best option.
If you have some training, a standard bodyweight squat provides an excellent method for leg training with just bodyweight.
For more advanced fitness practitioners, performing a jump squat can provide the extra challenge you may need for a good bodyweight leg workout.


Standard bodyweight squat (Bodyweight leg exercise)
The classic standard bodyweight squat can be performed virtually anywhere. You can wear standard workout shoes or even bare feet when performing this exercise (1).
How to:
Stand with your feet around shoulder-width apart and turned out 5–12 degrees.
Begin the motion by moving your hips backward, sitting back, and lowering your hips. Reach your arms out in front for counterbalance.
As you sit back, generate tension in your feet and legs by imagining you’re pushing your knees outward and sitting down between your thighs, as opposed to on top of them. This is to counteract the tendency to let your knees cave or turn inward.
Lower your hips until the tops of your thighs are parallel to the floor. You can go lower if your mobility allows.
Once you reach the bottom position, push through each foot evenly to stand up to the starting position.
Keep your knees pointing in the same direction as your toes throughout the entire range of motion.
Your torso should be roughly at the same angle as your shins throughout the motion. This means that you’ll lean slightly forward as you squat down, and your knees will move slightly forward as well.
When you’re first learning the bodyweight squat, start at a slow speed and practice before increasing your tempo.


Lunge form and variations
Alongside the squat, the lunge is a foundational lower body movement pattern that offers several exercise options.
The lunge pattern forms the basis of a wide range of movements in both athletic activities and everyday life, such as walking and running.
Muscles trained with the lunge
The lunge primarily targets the following muscles:
quadriceps
hamstrings
glutes
Since lunges have a high requirement for stabilization, they’ll work your core and glutes in a different manner than the squat exercises. Training lunge pattern movements will quickly improve your balance and stability.
If you’re very new to fitness, the basic lunge will challenge your coordination and strength. Start slowly and focus on the movement and balance itself.
Soon, you’ll be comfortable performing standard bodyweight lunges and be ready to try split lunges and jump lunges.


Standard bodyweight lunge (Bodyweight leg exercise)
The standard bodyweight lunge is the first lunge variation you should learn.
How to:
Begin standing with your feet hip-width apart.
Take a large step forward. The exact distance will depend on your body size but should be roughly 2–3 times the distance of a normal walking step. Your front foot should be pointing directly forward. Your back foot will be turned out very slightly.
Lower your hips by slowly bringing your back knee toward the ground. Actively rotate your back foot inward and raise your back heel as you lower your knee for optimal movement. Your front knee will bend as your center of mass lowers.
Continue lowering your body until your back knee is just off the ground. At the bottom of the lunge, your front shin should be perpendicular to the floor or angled forward slightly.
Push through your front foot to stand straight back up to the starting position.
You can alternate legs each repetition or stay in the staggered stance and perform one side all the way through before switching.
If you find yourself losing balance, be sure that your feet stay hip-width apart even once you take your step forward. There should be an imaginary diagonal line from your front foot to your rear foot.
You may also prefer to take a step backward to enter the initial staggered stance position, sometimes known as a reverse lunge. All other aspects remain the same.


Split lunge (Bodyweight leg exercise)
The split lunge, also called the Bulgarian split squat or just split squat in the fitness community, is a more advanced lunge variation in which your rear foot is elevated on a surface such as a chair or bench.
Elevating the rear foot shifts more of your weight to your front leg, increasing the demand and stimulus to the muscles on your front leg without adding any external weight.
The split lunge also helps prevent injury and improves sports performance to a greater degree than other common leg exercises (4).
The split lunge requires good balance and coordination, and you should be comfortable with standard lunges before attempting this exercise.
How to:
Begin standing lunge-distance in front of a roughly 18-inch (45.7-cm) tall chair seat with your feet hip-width apart.
Place one leg behind you on the chair. You can have the balls of your feet and toes on the chair or point your foot, so the top of your foot is in contact with the chair. Try both positions to see which is more comfortable.
At the top position, your front shin should have a slight rearward angle.
Lower your hips by slowly bringing your back knee toward the ground. Focus on lowering your back knee and hips and avoid driving forward with your front knee.
Continue lowering your body until the top of your front thigh is parallel to the ground. At the bottom of the split lunge, your front shin should be perpendicular to the floor or angled forward slightly.
Push through your front foot to return to the starting position. Focus your pressure in the rear-third area of your front foot.
You can alternate legs each repetition or stay in the staggered stance and perform one side all the way through before switching.
The split lunge will take a few workouts to get used to.


















Was this article helpful?

Yes
No


How to Step Up Your Workout with Walking Lunges

Variations
Safety
Benefits
Frequency
Takeaway
Walking lunges are a variation on the static lunge exercise. Instead of standing back upright after performing a lunge on one leg, as you would in a static bodyweight lunge, you “walk” forward by lunging out with the other leg. The movement continues for a set number of reps.
Walking lunges strengthen the leg muscles as well as the core, hips, and glutes. You can also make walking lunges more challenging by adding weights or doing a walking lunge with a torso twist.
Read on to learn more about the benefits of walking lunges and how to incorporate them into your fitness routine.
How to do a walking lunge
Stand up straight with your feet shoulder-width apart. Your hands can stay by the side of your body or on your hips.
Step forward with your right leg, putting the weight into your heel.
Bend the right knee, lowering down so that it’s parallel to the floor in a lunge position. Pause for a beat.
Without moving the right leg, move your left foot forward, repeating the same movement on the left leg. Pause as your left leg is parallel to the floor in a lunge position.
Repeat this movement, “walking” forward as you lunge, alternating legs.
Do 10 to 12 reps on each leg. Perform 2 to 3 sets.
Variations to try



Walking lunge with weights
Equipment needed: two dumbbells
How to: 
Stand up straight with your shoulders back. Hold one dumbbell in each hand and keep your arms at your sides, keeping your torso upright.
Keep your arms relaxed at your sides throughout the whole movement. Step forward with your right leg, putting your weight into your heel.
As your right foot strikes the floor and stabilizes, bend the right knee, lowering down parallel to the floor into a lunge position.
Without moving the right leg, move your left foot forward, repeating the same movement on the left leg. Pause as your left leg is parallel to the floor in a lunge position.
Repeat this movement, “walking” forward as you lunge, alternating legs.
Do 10 to 12 reps on each leg. Perform 2 to 3 sets.
Safety tips
Walking lunges require more balance and coordination than static lunges. One of the biggest risks is injuring yourself from falling due to a loss of balance. Incorrect form may also increase your risk for pulling a muscle.
Walking lunges are generally considered safe for most people. If you’re a beginner, you may want to start with a static lunge until you have the correct form. It’s important to have good form when doing walking lunges, which can help prevent injuries.
Follow these tips to stay safe:
Keep your body upright through the movement. Try to avoid leaning forward too much.
Keep your core engaged throughout the entire lunge.
Don’t overextend your leg when you lunge forward, which can cause your back to arch.
Try to step out enough so your body is comfortable vertically, and your torso and hips are straight down. Not stepping out far enough is also unsafe for your knees and can lead to injuries.
If you’re new to exercise, it can be helpful to work with a trainer, or a friend or family member familiar with walking lunges. They can help make sure your form is correct and provide tips to help you get the most from this move.
What are the benefits?
Walking lunges can help strengthen the lower body. They can also help stretch out the hamstring and glutes.


Increase range of motion
Walking lunges can help increase your range of motion by helping to increase flexibility, and loosen up your hips and hamstrings. This can help improve posture and balance, which can be beneficial to athletes, casual exercisers, and fitness novices alike.
Enhanced functionality
Walking lunges are a functional exercise. They mimic movements you do every day like standing up, sitting, and stepping forward to pick something up off the floor. Practicing walking lunges regularly can help make these everyday movements easier in real life.
Adding walking lunges to your routine
If you’re looking to improve your physical fitness level and strengthen your legs, try adding walking lunges to your weekly exercise routine 2 to 3 times a week.
If you’re new to fitness, you can start by doing 10 to 12 walking lunges at a time. If your goal is to lose weight or tone your body, try other lunge variations, too, such as jumping lunges or lunges with a bicep curl.
Additionally, try cardio or high-intensity interval training 2 to 3 times per week, alternating days with strength training, like lunges, on the other days.
If you aren’t sure how to set up an exercise routine, consider working with a certified personal trainer who can make a schedule for you to follow, or look for a routine online.
The takeaway
Walking lunges are an excellent functional exercise for strengthening the lower body. Add them to your workout routine a few times a week to strengthen your legs, hips, glutes, abs, and more.
If you’re new to exercise, practice performing a static lunge first. Once you have the movement down, you can try walking lunges. Work with a certified personal trainer if you aren’t sure you are doing the movement correctly.


 







