The Best Dumbbell Exercises To Target Every Muscle
21.03.25
/
Last Edited 21.03.25
Alex Kirkup-Lee

When it comes to building muscle, getting stronger, and improving your cardio capacity, dumbbells are the ultimate piece of equipment.
There’s no fiddling with setting up the squat rack or asking a random person in the gym to spot you. There’s no need to wait for your favorite machine to be free or stand in front of everyone by the mirrors if you don’t want to. There’ll always be a pair of dumbbells on the gym floor, and this one piece of equipment can get you a long way.
Create a heart-raising circuit using functional exercises, focus on building specific muscle groups using lighter loads, or reach further up the rack to make use of big compound lifts that will challenge your entire body. The options of dumbbell workouts are endless for both beginners and experienced lifters.
And if you only find yourself reaching for the dumbbells when you’re doing a home workout or all the squat racks are busy, then you might be surprised to know that using dumbbells can be just as effective (if not more effective) than using a barbell or machine for your workout.
We’re going to break down how to use this one kit wonder piece of equipment by showing you the best dumbbell exercises for each muscle group. No more excuses for the gym being too busy or not knowing what to do: This is your ultimate guide to the best dumbbell exercises.

Benefits Of Dumbbell Exercises
If you thought that barbell exercises ruled the gym, think again–dumbbells are a mighty piece of equipment that gives barbells a good run for their money. Numerous research studies into the effectiveness of dumbbells vs. barbells have proven that dumbbells are just as effective in activating target muscle groups and improving strength and power [1,2].
But if you’re left thinking, ‘Well, how can that be?’ since barbell exercises typically allow you to lift heavier, then we’ll explain:
Dumbbell exercises require greater stabilization. Controlling two separate loads requires a lot more stability and balance than lifting a barbell or machine. Using dumbbells activates the small stabilizing muscle around the working joint to control the weight, increasing overall muscle activation.
Dumbbells allow you to train unilaterally: Dumbbells offer the unique ability to train one side of the body at a time, which is ideal for addressing muscle imbalances or building an evenly developed physique.
Dumbbells allow for a greater range of motion. For example, during a bench press, you can bring the dumbbells all the way down to the side of your chest and then bring your arms together at the top to squeeze your pecs in a way that isn’t possible with a barbell. Numerous studies support using a full range of motion over a shorter range of motion in your exercises for enhanced muscle growth [3].
These benefits make dumbbells a very effective exercise–whether you’re doing slow, heavy reps to build strength, or fast, back-to-back complexes of higher rep exercises for metabolic conditioning (again, making them very versatile for a number of different goals).
If that wasn’t enough, dumbbells are extremely beginner-friendly. They’re also easy to use and safe, so unlike using the squat rack or bench, you won’t need to awkwardly ask for a spotter, as you can easily ‘bail’ a set of dumbbells. On busy gym days, they make the perfect ‘shy girl’ workout you can do in the corner and an effective home workout.
Feeling convinced? Let’s get into our ultimate guide to the best dumbbell exercises.


Upper Body Dumbbell Exercises


Dumbbell Back Exercises
Whether you’re chasing defined back muscles and size like CBum, or you want to get your first pull-up (or increase the number you can do under fatigue in a workout)–or maybe you’re just conscious of improving your posture after hunching at a desk all day, dumbbells and back exercises go hand in hand. A key benefit is the ability to train unilaterally, unlocking the ability to iron out imbalances and ensure equal development of both sides of the back.
There are actually 40 muscles in the back, but most back workouts focus on the traps, rhomboids, and lats, which are superficial muscles, meaning they sit closest to the surface of the skin and are therefore most visible. The erector spinae is also important, playing a crucial role in posture, stabilizing the spine, and preventing back pain.

The Best Dumbbell Exercises For The Back:
Bent Over Dumbbell Row - A staple for overall back development.
Dumbbell Single Arm Row - Isolates each side of the back, which is great for fixing imbalances.
Reverse Flys – Targets the rear delts and upper traps.
Dumbbell Pullover – Targets the lats and chest.
Seal Rows (Chest-Supported Rows) – Removes any lower-back strain, focusing on mid-back.
Renegade Row - Works the back and core at the same time.
Dumbbell Deadlifts – Builds overall posterior chain strength.


Dumbbell Tricep Exercises
Whether you’re chasing bigger arms to show off in your power t-shirt or to sculpt and define your muscles in a tank top, training your triceps has a massive impact on both arm size and strength. Making up about two-thirds of your total arm size, stronger triceps will allow you to build weight on your bench press, power in your push press, and pace on your press-ups.
The triceps are made of three heads: the lateral, long, and medial heads. While you can’t isolate each head, changing your grip can emphasize certain heads more.
Dumbbells are an ideal way to isolate the triceps and make you focus on mind-muscle connection, allowing you to consciously focus on the muscle(s) you are using during the exercise, in this case, the triceps. Numerous researchers have proved the effectiveness of this training method, with a 2018 study by the European Journal of Sport Science finding that mind-muscle connection enhanced muscle hypertrophy after 8 weeks due to better muscle recruitment [4].

The Best Dumbbell Exercises For The Triceps:
Dumbbell Skull Crusher - One of the best for triceps hypertrophy (works the lo g & lateral heads) [5].
Tricep Kickback - Great for high reps and triceps definition (works the lateral head)
Single Arm Tricep Extension - Best for fully stretching and engaging the long head.
Close-Grip Dumbbell Press - Mimics is a close-grip bench press with dumbbells that target all three heads.
Tate Press (Dumbbell Triceps Press) - Hits the triceps from a different angle (works the lateral & medial heads).
Reverse Grip Dumbbell Press - Changing the grip activates the lower triceps (AKA medial head).


Dumbbell Bicep Exercises
When it comes to training arms, the muscle that probably comes to mind first is the biceps. Look by the dumbbell rack at any time, and you’ll probably see at least one gym bro pumping out a set of bicep curls.
But even if you’re not chasing that sleeve-stretching bicep pump, stronger biceps will help your compound lifts, like deadlifts and pull-ups, enhance arm endurance valuable in many sports, such as swimming and rowing, and help with daily activities such as carrying groceries.
Bicep exercises target the short and long heads of the biceps, with many also working the brachialis and brachioradialis muscles, which work in synergy with the biceps to flex the elbow.

The Best Dumbbell Exercises For The Biceps:
Dumbbell Bicep Curl - The classic movement for overall biceps growth.
Hammer Curls – Targets the brachialis (muscle under the biceps) for thicker arms.
Dumbbell Preacher Curl – Eliminates momentum to focus purely on biceps contraction.
Zottman Curl – Combines a regular curl and reverse curl to hit all parts of the biceps and forearms.
Concentration Curls – Maximizes biceps peak by isolating one arm at a time.
Spider Curls – Keeps constant tension on the biceps for better definition.
Reverse Curls – Hits the brachialis and forearms for balanced arm growth.


Dumbbell Shoulder Exercises
You might find yourself overly focusing on the biceps and triceps when it comes to arm workouts, but strengthening your shoulders is just as important. Not only is it important for building strength in overhead lifts, but it also improves your posture, stability, and range of motion of the upper body.
Dumbbell shoulder exercises mainly target the deltoids (which include the anterior, lateral, and posterior head), but they’ll also strengthen the smaller stabilizing muscles of the shoulder joint, including the rotator cuff muscles.

The Best Dumbbell Exercises For The Shoulders:
Dumbbell Shoulder Press – Targets all three heads, emphasizing the front delts.
Arnold Press – Adds rotation to hit all three heads, especially the front delts.
Neutral-Grip Shoulder Press – A safer variation for people with shoulder pain.
Front Raises – Isolates the front delts for definition.
Lateral Raises – The best isolation exercise for the side delts.
Reverse Flys – Great for rear delts and upper back.
Dumbbell Shrugs – Builds strong, defined traps.


Dumbbell Chest Exercises
If you thought the barbell bench press was the only way to bigger pecs, think again. Dumbbells provide some pretty hefty competition when it comes to building the chest muscles, and studies have proven the dumbbell bench press can elicit greater activity in the pecs major compared to its barbell counterpart [6].
The pecs have two main sections: the pectoralis major and the pectoralis minor. The first is the larger muscle, which includes the upper, lower, and inner chest muscles, which together give your chest its bulk and strength. The pectoralis minor is located underneath the major muscle and stabilizes your shoulder blade.
Using dumbbells allows you to stretch both sections of the chest through a greater range of motion and contract them to a greater degree at the top of each rep.

The Best Dumbbell Exercises For The Chest:
Dumbbell Bench Press - Great for overall chest development, targeting the middle portion of the chest.
Incline Dumbbell Bench Press - Focuses on the upper chest, helping to build a fuller chest shape.
Decline Dumbbell Bench Press: Targets the lower chest, helping to add balance and definition.
Dumbbell Chest Fly - Targets the chest adductors, allowing for a focused contraction on the inner chest muscles.
Dumbbell Pullover: This exercise stretches the chest muscles through a wide range of motion, targeting the lower chest fibers while also engaging the lats and other upper body muscles.
Dumbbell Squeeze Press: Enhances chest contraction and engagement by focusing on the inner chest.
Dumbbell Push-Up: Increases range of motion and activates the chest more intensely than regular push-ups.


Dumbbell Core Exercises
Maybe you’re bored of your traditional crunches and bodyweight planks. Adding dumbbells to your ab workouts will not only ramp up the difficulty of your current ab exercises but also open up the possibility of new ab exercises, such as anti-rotation and anti-side bend exercises that require weight for the body to resist to make the movement possible.
Dumbbell core exercises will work your ‘six-pack muscles’ (the rectus abdominis), the transversus abdominis (the deepest muscle of the abs that wraps around the waist to support the spine), and the internal and external obliques, which run down the side of the core.

The Best Dumbbell Exercises For The Core:
Dumbbell Russian Twists: Targets the obliques and improves rotational strength.
Dumbbell Side Bend: Focuses on the obliques, helping sculpt the sides of the waist.
Dumbbell Deadbug: Engages the core and stabilizes muscles while promoting good posture.
Dumbbell Leg Raises: Strengthens the lower abs and hip flexors, working the entire core.
Dumbbell Woodchoppers: A twisting motion that targets the obliques, abs, and lower back.
Dumbbell Renegade Row: Engages the core, shoulders, and back while maintaining a plank position.
Dumbbell Pallof Press: Strengthens the core and improves stability with an anti-rotation movement.


Dumbbell Leg Exercises
Whether you’re looking for some lower body accessory exercises to do after a compound lift, exercises to pair in a superset, or it’s peak gym time and you’re limited on equipment, dumbbells are an extremely valuable training tool for leg day.
Dumbbells can be used for compound leg exercises, such as squats, deadlifts, and RDLs, or isolation exercises, targeting the main muscles of the legs: the quads, glutes, hamstrings, and calves.
Dumbbells also allow you to train your legs unilaterally, correcting muscle imbalances, strengthening each leg individually, and improving symmetry in a way that can’t be done using a barbell.

The Best Dumbbell Exercises For The Legs:
Dumbbell Squats - Targets the quads, hamstrings, and glutes; a fundamental compound movement for overall leg strength.
Dumbbell Lunges - Focuses on the quads, hamstrings, and glutes; helps correct imbalances and improves stability.
Dumbbell Bulgarian Split Squat - Target the quads, glutes, and hamstrings; great for balance and unilateral strength.
Dumbbell Deadlifts - Engage the hamstrings, glutes, and lower back, strengthening the posterior chain and improving hip hinge mechanics.
Dumbbell Step-Ups - Work the quads, glutes, and hamstrings; excellent for functional strength and unilateral leg work.
Dumbbell Goblet Squats - Targets the quads, glutes, and hamstrings; allows for deeper squats and engages the core for stability.
Dumbbell Romanian Deadlifts: Focuses on the hamstrings, glutes, and lower back; emphasizes the hip hinge movement for posterior chain strength.
Dumbbell Calf Raises Target the calf muscles, which makes them great for calf growth and strength. They can be performed standing or seated.
Dumbbell Sumo Squats: Focus on the glutes, quads, and adductors, as well as targeting the inner thighs and glutes with a wider stance.
Dumbbell Glute Bridges: Primarily work the glutes and hamstrings. These activate the posterior chain and improve hip thrust power.


Dumbbells are one of the most effective and versatile tools for building strength, muscle, and endurance.
Whether you're a beginner or a seasoned lifter, incorporating dumbbell exercises into your workouts can help you improve balance, coordination, and overall fitness. Plus, they’re perfect for home and gym training, allowing you to work out anytime, anywhere.
Whether you do a full dumbbell-only workout, incorporate some dumbbell exercises after a barbell lift, or even pair them with an erg in a complex, dumbbell exercises are an effective way to get stronger and fitter, whatever your goal.
So grab those dumbbells and get training–and don’t forget to download the Gymshark Training App to get inspired by preprogrammed dumbbell workouts. The app makes it easy to track your sets, reps, and weights along the way.

References:

[1] Smoak, Y. (2023). A Randomised Trial Comparing Barbell and Dumbbell Bench Press on Maximal Strength and Power Output.
[2] Saeterbakken, A.H., van den Tillaar, R. and Fimland, M.S. (2011). A comparison of muscle activity and 1-RM strength of three chest-press exercises with different stability requirements.
[3] Schoenfeld, B.J. and Grgic, J. (2020). Effects of range of motion on muscle development during resistance training interventions: A systematic review.
[4] Schoenfeld, B.J., Vigotsky, A., Contreras, B., Golden, S., Alto, A., Larson, R., Winkelman, N. and Paoli, A. (2018). Differential effects of attentional focus strategies during long-term resistance training
[5] Maeo, S., Wu, Y., Huang, M., Sakurai, H., Kusagawa, Y., Sugiyama, T., Kanehisa, H. and Isaka, T. (2022). Triceps brachii hypertrophy is substantially greater after elbow extension training performed in the overhead versus neutral arm position.
[6] Solstad, T.E., Andersen, V., Shaw, M., Hoel, E.M., Vonheim, A. and Atle Hole Saeterbakken (2020). A Comparison of Muscle Activation between Barbell Bench Press and Dumbbell Flyes in Resistance-Trained Males.
[7] Schoenfeld, B.J., Peterson, M.D., Ogborn, D., Contreras, B. and Sonmez, G.T. (2015). Effects of Low- vs. High-Load Resistance Training on Muscle Strength and Hypertrophy in Well-Trained Men.

Alex Kirkup-lee
Content Writer

