How muscles are fueled
Muscles are fueled by three energy systems: the phosphagen system, the anaerobic (glycolytic) system, and the aerobic (oxidative) system.
As your muscles work, these systems take turns leading the way to synthesize adenosine triphosphate, providing energy to your muscle cells.
The first two systems are shorter duration systems, meaning they provide high force production for a short amount of time.
The phosphagen system provides muscle energy for up to 30 seconds of muscle work and is involved in high force production activities. After that, the glycolytic system provides energy for work from 30 seconds–3 minutes and is involved in moderate force production activities (1Trusted Source, 2).
These two systems are involved in most resistance training activities focused on strength and muscle hypertrophy.
As exercise duration exceeds 3 minutes, the aerobic system takes over and is involved in lower force production activities (1Trusted Source, 2).
These energy systems are constantly at work during all types of activity to supply your body with the energy it needs to perform activities.
For example, if a person is lifting heavy weights, they will produce a greater force for a short period of time, but they will need a period to recover to be able to repeat the same activity with the same force.
Nevertheless, the amount of time you rest to recover enough to repeat the same performance can be adjusted to help meet specific training goals.
Whether your goal is to increase muscle size or increase endurance, rest periods between sets can be tailored to achieve each type of goal.
SUMMARY
Muscles use specific energy systems for very short-duration or high-force activities. The rest periods between sets of resistance training can be changed to achieve certain goals, such as strength or weight loss.


How long should I rest between sets if my goal is muscle mass?
In order for muscle fibers to grow in size, they need to be stimulated to increase the cross-sectional area of the muscle. This is called muscular hypertrophy.
Typically for bodybuilders, the increase in muscle size is the most important factor, compared with strength, endurance, and fat loss. Bodybuilders are judged in their sport based on size, muscle symmetry, and definition.
Even if you aren’t a bodybuilder, many fitness enthusiasts want to enhance muscle size to achieve a certain look.
If your goal is aesthetic, you’d benefit from hypertrophy training. This type of training typically leads to higher lactic acid and blood lactate levels, which are associated with an increase in muscle work performed.
In hypertrophy training, the objective is to overload the muscles and cause temporary trauma to the muscle fibers so that they are stimulated to grow and increase their cross-sectional area.
Typically, there is very little difference between the loads handled for those wanting to induce hypertrophy and those wishing to solely increase strength. These loads typically range from 50%–90% of your 1 rep max.
However, the biggest difference in training for muscle size versus strength is in rest between sets. Studies have found that to induce muscle hypertrophy, optimal rest intervals are between 30–90 seconds (3, 4Trusted Source).
SUMMARY
Muscle hypertrophy is best achieved with moderate rest between sets, such as 30–90 seconds.


How long should I rest between sets if I’m new to weightlifting?
Novice weightlifters are those who are new to weightlifting or have been lifting for less than 6 months. Within those first few months, most novices are getting used to the feeling of resistance training and mastering the form and mechanics to perform safely.
One study found that the greatest benefit for untrained individuals was 60–120-second rest intervals between sets. The goal is to allow you to recover enough in order to perform the next set with good form (8Trusted Source).
As you progress in your training, you can adjust your objectives and rest intervals to focus on more specific resistance goals, but your initial program should provide a good base of skill.
SUMMARY
Novice weightlifters typically benefit from 60–120 seconds of rest between sets. They may change the rest interval depending on their goals as their training progresses.


How long should I rest between sets if I’m trying to perfect my form?
Proper biomechanics increase your movement efficiency and decrease your risk of injury. How long it takes to perfect your form is relative and varies depending on the exercise.
For example, Olympic-style weightlifting focuses on skilled movement with rapid speed of performance. Conversely, the amount of complex movement in a bench press is much less and requires less coordination of multiple body parts.
Nevertheless, when trying to perfect your form, you should focus on a lighter training load — in other words, less weight. Recovery should be enough to allow your body to undertake the movement again with good mechanics.
Typically a 1–2-minute rest interval will allow adequate recovery. Still, you can focus on form while promoting muscular breakdown to induce improvement.
SUMMARY
Many people can perfect their form and progress in their training program with 1–2 minutes of rest between sets.













