www.NSCA.com



WHAT IS HYPERTROPHY?
Muscle hypertrophy (known simply as hypertrophy)
is an increase in the size of a muscle, or its cross-
sectional area attributed to an increase in the size and/
or number of myofibrils (actin and myosin) within a
given muscle fiber. Muscle hypertrophy occurs in both
type I and type II muscle fibers but to a greater extent
in type II muscle fibers (Weir & Brown, 2012).


THE BENEFITS OF MUSCLE HYPERTROPHY
There is a strong correlation between muscle cross-
sectional area and muscle strength (Schoenfeld B.
J., 2010). This means that more muscle mass creates
greater potential for developing maximal strength.
In addition to greater strength potential, resistance training
and muscle hypertrophy have a positive effect on body
composition, addressing two of the three factors that
comprise energy expenditure; resting metabolic rate (RMR),
physical activity, and the thermic effect of food. Resistance
training causes an increased energy expenditure not only
during exercise but in the 24-48 hours following activity.
Additionally, fat-free mass accounts for approximately
65-70% of an individual’s RMR; increasing an individual’s
muscle mass results in an increased RMR (Spano, 2012).
Body composition is measured as percentage of fat-free
mass to fat mass. An individual’s percent body fat can
be decreased (improved) by inducing hypertrophy.


INDUCING MUSCLE HYPERTROPHY
The three primary factors that induce a hypertrophic response
in the body include mechanical tension, muscle damage, and
metabolic stress. The degree of mechanical tension from a
resistance training session is primarily determined by intensity
(amount of weight lifted) and time under tension (duration
of the applied load). Resistance training that creates an
overload situation causes muscle damage and an inflammatory
response, potentiating the release of various growth factors.
Metabolic stress arises from training programs that rely heavily
on the anaerobic system, decreasing the pH level and causing
muscle fiber degradation (Schoenfeld B. , 2011).
While there are a number of ways to induce hypertrophy in
the weight room, it seems that employing multiple sets with
moderate loads (6-12 reps, 65-85% 1RM) and rest periods (60
seconds) creates the greatest elevation of testosterone and
growth hormone (primary anabolic hormones); compared to
heavy loads (1-5 reps, >85% 1RM) with long rest periods (2-5
minutes) and light loads (12+ reps, <65% 1RM) with short rest
periods (30 seconds) (Schoenfeld B. J., 2010).
Muscular tension, damage, and metabolic stress cause an
anabolic response, stimulating recovery to get the body
back to homeostasis and ultimately supercompensation.
Supercompensation refers to increasing the body’s ability to
manage the training stress. Simply stated, the body will repair
itself above and beyond its previous ability so that the same
workout will not cause the same amount of damage. In order to
cause continual positive adaptations, a training program needs
to systematically progress by modifying exercise variables
(frequency, intensity, volume, rest periods, exercise selection).


Regarding hypertrophy, overall training volume is the most
commonly adjusted variable.
Sleep and nutrition each play a role in recovery and ultimately
the body’s ability to undergo supercompensation. The body
uses sleep to repair damaged tissue and can play a vital role
in hypertrophy. Research shows that 7-9 hours of sleep usually
suffices for those participating in intense activity like resistance
training (Kubitz, Landers, Petruzzello, & Han, 1996). Nutrition,
specifically protein, provides the resources necessary to repair
the damage done to muscles during resistance training. The
general recommendation for recovery from intense activity
is 1.2-2.0 grams per kilogram of bodyweight per day (Spano,
2012).

REFERENCES
1. Kubitz, K., Landers, D., Petruzzello, S., & Han, M. (1996).
The Effects of Acute and Chronic Exercise on Sleep: A Meta-
Analytic Review. Sports Med., 21, 277-291.
2. Schoenfeld, B. (2011, August). The Use of Specialized
Training to Maximize Muscle Hypertrophy. SCJ, 33(4), 60-65.
3. Schoenfeld, B. J. (2010, October). The Mechanisms of
Muscle Hypertrophy and Their Application to Resistance
Training. JSCR, 24(10), 2857-2872.
4. Spano, M. (2012). Nutrition in the Personal Training Setting.
In J. W. Coburn, & M. H. Malek, NSCA’s Essentials of Personal
Training (2nd ed., pp. 107-123). Champaign, IL: Human Kinetics.
5. Weir, J. P., & Brown, L. E. (2012). Resistance Training
Adaptations. In J. M. Coburn, & M. H. Malek, NSCA’s Essentials
of Personal Training (2nd ed., pp. 71-88). Champaign, IL: Human
Kinetics.
